Changelog post for Nov 14, 2024 (#3591)
timescale/docs: about/changelog.md

All the latest features and updates to Timescale products.

> ### 🤩 SQL Assistant, TimescaleDB v2.17, HIPAA Compliance, and Better Logging

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 🤩 SQL Assistant, TimescaleDB v2.17, HIPAA compliance, and better logging
```

<Label type="date">November 14, 2024</Label>

> ### 🤖 New AI Companion: SQL Assistant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 🤖 New AI companion: SQL Assistant
```

SQL Assistant uses AI to help you write SQL faster and more accurately.

> **Real-Time Help:** chat with models like OpenAI 4o and Claude 3.5 Sonnet to get help writing SQL. Describe what you want in natural language and have AI write the SQL for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Real-time help:** chat with models like OpenAI 4o and Claude 3.5 Sonnet to get help writing SQL. Describe what you want in natural language and have AI write the SQL for you.
```

<!-- TODO: embed this YouTube video https://youtu.be/3Droej_E0cQ -->

> **Error Resolution**: when you run into an error, we'll propose a recommended fix that you can choose to accept.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Error resolution**: when you run into an error, SQL Assistant proposes a recommended fix that you can choose to accept.
```

> ![](https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/ai-error-fix.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ![](https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/ai-error-fix.png)
```

> **Generate Titles and Descriptions**: click a button and we'll generate a title and description for your query. No more untitled queries!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Generate titles and descriptions**: click a button and SQL Assistant generates a title and description for your query. No more untitled queries!
```

![](https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/ai-generate-title.png)

See our [blog post](https://www.timescale.com/blog/postgres-gui-sql-assistant/) or [docs](https://docs.timescale.com/getting-started/latest/run-queries-from-console/#sql-assistant) for full details!

> ### 🏄 TimescaleDB v2.17 - Performance improvements for analytical queries and continuous aggregate refreshes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 🏄 TimescaleDB v2.17 - performance improvements for analytical queries and continuous aggregate refreshes
```

> All new services created on Timescale Cloud starting this week use TimescaleDB v2.17 Existing services are upgraded gradually during their maintenance windows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting this week, all new services created on Timescale Cloud use [TimescaleDB v2.17](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/releases/tag/2.17.0). Existing services are upgraded gradually during their maintenance windows.
```

Not sure exactly which release it is. Maybe update the link to the correct one.

> TimescaleDB v2.17 significantly improves the performance of continuous aggregate refreshes, and contains performance improvements for analytical queries and delete operations over compressed hypertables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TimescaleDB v2.17 significantly improves the performance of [continuous aggregate refreshes](https://docs.timescale.com/use-timescale/latest/continuous-aggregates/refresh-policies/), and contains performance improvements for [analytical queries and delete operations])https://docs.timescale.com/use-timescale/latest/compression/modify-compressed-data/) over compressed hypertables.
```

> We recommend upgrading at the next available opportunity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Best practice is to upgrade at the next available opportunity.
```

> **Highlighted features in TimescaleDB v2.17**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Highlighted features in TimescaleDB v2.17 are: 
```

*   Significant performance improvements for continuous aggregate policies:

> *   Continuous aggregate refresh is now using `merge` instead of deleting old materialized data and re-inserting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   Continuous aggregate refresh now uses `merge` instead of deleting old materialized data and re-inserting.
```

> *   This update can decrease dramatically the amount of data that must be written on the continuous aggregate in the presence of a small number of changes, reduce the `i/o` cost of refreshing a continuous aggregate, and generate fewer Write-Ahead Logs (`WAL`). Overall, continuous aggregate policies will be more lightweight, use less system resources, and complete faster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *  Continuous aggregate policies are now more lightweight, use less system resources, and complete faster.  This update:
          * Decreases dramatically the amount of data that must be written on the continuous aggregate in the presence of a small number of changes 
          * Reduces the i/o cost of refreshing a continuous aggregate 
          * Generates fewer Write-Ahead Logs (`WAL`)
```

*   Increased performance for real-time analytical queries over compressed hypertables:

> *   We are excited to introduce additional Single Instruction, Multiple Data (`SIMD`) vectorization optimization to our engine by supporting vectorized execution for queries that group by using the `segment_by` column(s) and aggregate using the basic aggregate functions (`sum`, `count`, `avg`, `min`, `max`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   *   We are excited to introduce additional Single Instruction, Multiple Data (SIMD) vectorization optimization to TimescaleDB. This release supports vectorized execution for queries that _group by_ using the `segment_by` column(s), and _aggregate_ using the `sum`, `count`, `avg`, `min`, and `max` basic aggregate functions.
```

> *   Stay tuned for more to come in follow-up releases! Support for grouping on additional columns, filtered aggregation, vectorized expressions, and `time_bucket` is coming soon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   *   Stay tuned for more to come in follow-up releases! Support for grouping on additional columns, filtered aggregation, vectorized expressions, and `time_bucket` is coming soon.
```

> *   Improved performance of deletes on compressed hypertables when a large amount of data is affected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   *   Improved performance of deletes on compressed hypertables when a large amount of data is affected.
```

> *   This improvement speeds up operations that delete whole segments by skipping the decompression step. It is enabled for all deletes that filter by the `segment_by` column(s).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This improvement speeds up operations that delete whole segments by skipping the decompression step. It is enabled for all deletes that filter by the `segment_by` column(s).
```
This is a follow in sentence from the previous point rather than a new point.

> ### Enhanced HIPAA Compliance Support in TimescaleDB

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Enhanced HIPAA compliance support in TimescaleDB
```

Is this TimescaleDB or TimescaleCloud. From the content it looks like Cloud. If this is TimescaleDB, it means you have 2 separate sections saying _highlighted features in this release_ for a single release in one product.

> TimescaleDB introduces essential updates to facilitate HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act) compliance, empowering organizations to better protect sensitive healthcare information while simplifying regulatory adherence. We recommend our customers to upgrade to the Enterprise plan to leverage these improvements in data security and auditing:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TimescaleDB introduces essential updates to facilitate Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) compliance, empowering organizations to better protect sensitive healthcare information while simplifying regulatory adherence. Best practice is that customers upgrade to the [Enterprise plan](https://docs.timescale.com/about/latest/pricing-and-account-management/#features-included-in-each-plan) to leverage the following improvements in data security and auditing:
```

> *   **Introduced Enhanced Encryption and Access Controls**: Timescale encrypts all data at rest and in transit, while providing SAML, SSO, and MFA options for added access security.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   **Introduced enhanced encryption and access controls**: Timescale Cloud encrypts all data at rest and in transit, while providing SAML, SSO, and MFA options for added access security.
```

> *   **Expanded Audit Logging for HIPAA Compliance**: With the pgAudit and pgSodium extensions, users gain comprehensive logging for key data interactions, capturing user identity, access times, types of operations, and specific data accessed. These logs can be used to identify and investigate potential security incidents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   **Expanded audit logging for HIPAA compliance**: with the pgAudit and pgSodium extensions, you gain comprehensive logging for key data interactions. This enables you to capture the following information: user identity, access times, types of operations, and specific data accessed. You use these logs to identify and investigate potential security incidents.
```

> *   **Established Breach Notification Protocol**: In case of a PHI data breach, Timescale notifies affected customers within 72 hours, ensuring transparency and compliance with HIPAA requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   **Established breach notification protocol**: in case of a PHI data breach, Timescale notifies affected customers within 72 hours, ensuring transparency and compliance with HIPAA requirements.
```

> **Highlighted Features in this Release**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Highlighted Features in this Release:
```

> *   **Robust Auditing Capabilities**: TimescaleDB now enables the `pgAudit` extension and soon, the `pgSodium` extension, providing essential logging capabilities to support HIPAA audits. By capturing actions such as read, write, and delete on sensitive data, these logs help users monitor and investigate access to PHI as required by HIPAA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   **Robust auditing capabilities**: Timescale Cloud now enables the `pgAudit` extension and soon, the `pgSodium` extension, providing essential logging capabilities to support HIPAA audits. By capturing actions such as read, write, and delete on sensitive data, these logs help users monitor and investigate access to PHI as required by HIPAA.
```

You have already said this. In the previous mention it says that pgSodium is already enabled.

> *   **Detailed Compliance Documentation**: Timescale now offers a Business Associate Agreement (BAA) and a HIPAA Security Rule Self-Assessment, in addition to SOC 2 Type II and GDPR compliance documentation, for customers needing additional verification of security practices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   **Detailed compliance documentation**: For customers needing additional verification of security practices, Timescale now offers a Business Associate Agreement (BAA) and a HIPAA Security Rule Self-Assessment, in addition to SOC 2 Type II and GDPR compliance documentation.
```

> *   **Shared Responsibility Model for Compliance**: TimescaleDB's shared responsibility model clarifies roles between Timescale and customers, outlining each party's duties in data encryption, access management, auditing, and breach notification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   **Shared responsibility model for compliance**: Timescale's shared responsibility model clarifies roles between Timescale and customers, outlining each party's duties in data encryption, access management, auditing, and breach notification.
```

> ### Expanded Logging within Timescale Console

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Expanded logging within Timescale Console
```
